+++
date = '2025-04-04T11:29:03-04:00'
draft = false
author = 'Ben Prothe'
title = 'My Dad, CAD, and Bad... AI Fears'
tags = ['Short']
+++

Perspective can be a funny thing… It’s so hard to remember your historical context when you’re “up to your ass in alligators” or “in the thick of it”.

Being a software engineer or any kind of tech adjacent specialist has been a little intimidating lately in the face of AI. There are lots of changes stirring up anxiety. For one, there’s a change in the workflow; now it’s `prompt => generate => review => tweak => test => repeat`. There’s definitely something lost in the process that we fell in love with. Then there’s the more pronounced existential fear. The fear that AI is going to displace developers in the longer term. Certain personalities on social media definitely seem intent to replace or significantly reduce engineer salaries line items. I’ve got an anecdote for that last one. It’s not going to make this shakeup any more comfortable but it can maybe give a hint of optimism for where we’re headed.

My dad is in town. He’s a retired mechanical engineer turned metallurgist. We were talking this morning about the advancements in technology since he was a student in the 80’s. I was curious when he picked up CAD. CAD is a software tool used by nuts-and-bolts engineers to diagram and design structures and parts for manufacturing. It’s a powerful tool that enables those engineers to have accurate measurements and, as it advanced, even allowed engineers to digitally prototype and run simulations. I only know about it because he frequently uses it to design projects like decks and sheds or other DIY projects for me and my siblings’ homes. His story was enlightening…

In college, the only computers available had to be fed paper cards with literal “scripts” for the computer to run… he thinks he remembers the languages he worked with were Cobol and Fortran 😂. He would insert the cards and then wait for the scripts to finish and check for errors or results the next day. In his first gig out of college, desktop computers started popping up but they were used strictly for word processing or pseudo-spreadsheet kind of tasks. Engineering sketches were still done on physical paper by engineer draftsmen. The job after that had a proto-CAD application where a draftsman would use a stylus of some kind on an old school screen. That company manufactured fasteners for aircraft so you can imagine that those folks really had to know their stuff. It wasn’t until the 90’s with his third job that he was trained to use AutoCAD.

There were a few things about his account that really stood out to me:
First, the CAD software could do way more and do it quicker than a draftsman, but it could be deceptive. The end result would always “look good” but the polish could hide design flaws. So it became very important for anyone using the software to understand what it was doing and be able to catch deep underlying problems.

Does that not sound so familiar to our situation today? It’s a familiar problem! We can use AI to generate huge swaths of code, in terms of raw lines added. Getting the result to actually work is the first level of difficulty. AI is pretty good at figuring out what connections might be missing to get something to work. But the architectural approach used? That needs to be solved before you even write the prompt. We need to understand what good software design looks like to be able to steer it clear of problematic, insecure, unmaintainable, unscalable patterns. We need to be able to recognize when the generators are repeating themselves and steer them towards abstraction. The need for skilled engineers has not gone away. But the day-to-day activities of those engineers have changed and will continue to change.

Second, I wondered what happened to those draftsmen who were so critical? Do you think they were shaken up by the emergence of technology that replaced the graphite, paper, and desklamp vibes they had chosen as a career? Probably. They probably also felt fear that they would all be replaced and that any engineer with potato fingers could draft diagrams. Sadly, I do think the magic of manual drafting was probably lost forever. As for replacement? I think those draftsmen became the very best CAD engineers because they were able to see past the superficial aspect of the new drafts and were painfully aware of different kinds of factors for which they needed to account.

I think those two anecdotes are where I’m choosing to aim my hopes for the future of software engineering. Will the nature of our work change? Absolutely. Will more, less specialized people be able to develop applications? Almost certainly. Will we be the best at it? Definitely, and there will still be demand. In fact, think of all the problems that will arise from having people from other backgrounds developing apps. Someone will need to swoop in and address the problems.

That’s it for today.

Peace!

Ben
