+++
date = '2025-04-10T13:32:50-04:00'
draft = false
author = 'Ben Prothe'
title = 'Infinite scroll with a side of Copilot'
tags = ['React', 'Copilot', 'AI']
+++

One of my new goals for using AI as a development tool is to start trying to use it for more than just enhanced autocomplete, with some important limitations. First, I want to make sure I actually continue to learn as I code. So I don't want to use Copilot as a starting point. Second, I don't want to enter a "vibe coding" loop, blindly accepting changes.

I had a good experience with Copilot recently with a self assigned challenge. The goal was to build an [implementation of a generic Infinite Scrolling component](https://github.com/xxblincolnxx/infinite-scroll) or set of hooks/utilities using React and Typescript. Eventually I plan on creating my own components library that I can inject into any of my React projects. This work will probably be a part of that package.

Here's what I did, big picture:

**1. I Started with Brute Force and Inelegant Solutions**

I really wanted to make sure that I started organically so that I had control of naming, techniques used around fetching and detection, file structure, etc. Importantly, I felt like it was important to make sure to have intimate knowledge of how the code worked. I researched this part quite a bit before I put digital pen to paper. I still reflexively separated components and did some simple abstractions, but this wasn't the focus at this stage.

As for AI use, I probably used the Copilot chat a few times in this process to help find my simple errors. Those were things I would have found eventually but I could use Copilot to speed up the process and reduce frustrations. Otherwise, this was an organic implementation.

**2. I Used AI to Help Speed Up Abstraction and Refactoring**

My next phase was to use very descriptive prompts to guide Copilot to help me refactor my code and make it more reusable. In my prompts I left, only a little room for the AI to ad-lib and decide on solutions.

**3. What AI did not do well?**

- Generic typing. Copilot was more than happy to use "any" and "unknown" types to make TypeScript happy. I had to explicitly tell it to replace "any" with generics several times.
- Inferring design choices. For instance, Copilot did not infer that the "Loading" component should be used when the fetch was in progress. I found it a bit weird but it was an easy fix.
- Autopilot. If I was not prescriptive and if I got into more of a "vibe coding" workflow, Copilot would get stuck in loops like this: `Generate an error => fix it but create a different error => fix the second error but re-create the first error`. I was able to fix this if I scrapped everything from that first prompt and actually prescribe a good approach for how to solve the problem.

- **Example:** I wanted to enhance an HOC to accommodate a different use case. My initial prompt was simply, "Make the HOC support a use case where the user could change the API request by sending a different query param, thus requiring the display data to reset". The solution that the AI came up with was an anti-pattern in React where an array prop was spread onto the dependency array of a useEffect inside the HOC. I just backed up and told the chat to use a solution that included a new boolean prop, "shouldResetData".

**4. What did AI do well?**

- Refactoring... but only when I knew what solution I wanted. The second part of that statement is key. I had to know what abstractions I wanted. So, after I got the "brute force" component working I used prompts like the following: "take these logically grouped hooks and extrapolate them into a custom hook" or "take this functionality and turn it into a generic higher order component that can provide infinite scrolling for any kind of child component". The outcome was fantastic. It generated what I would have coded, but in a few seconds, not hours. If I was more generic it wouldn't have been as effective.

- Catching boilerplate that I've missed. If my project didn't load properly I could describe to the chat what I was seeing and it could pick out what I missed; things like infinite useEffect procs... I might know its a useEffect that's the issue, but Copilot was really quick at identifying which one was the offender.
